===============================
Hello World Tutorial
===============================

Build your first OSPREY agent. One MCP server, one mock control system, zero
complexity. By the end of this tutorial, you'll have an agent that reads
control system channels using the Osprey agent.

.. dropdown:: **Prerequisites**
   :color: info
   :icon: list-unordered

   **Required:**

   - Python 3.11+
   - `Claude Code <https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/overview>`_ CLI installed
   - Osprey framework installed (``uv tool install osprey-framework``, or
     ``uv sync --extra dev`` if working from a clone)
   - ``ANTHROPIC_API_KEY`` set in your environment

   If you haven't installed the framework yet, follow the :doc:`installation guide <installation>`.

Step 1: Create the Project
---------------------------

Create a ready-to-run project in one command:

.. code-block:: bash

   osprey build my-first-agent --preset hello-world
   cd my-first-agent

.. note::

   First run may take 1--2 minutes to create a virtual environment and install
   dependencies. Subsequent builds are near-instant.

Step 2: Understand What Was Generated
--------------------------------------

Your project has three key files that control everything:

**config.yml** --- Project Configuration

.. code-block:: yaml

   control_system:
     type: mock    # Change to 'epics' for real hardware
     writes_enabled: false   # Read-only by default

     limits_checking:
       enabled: true
       database_path: "data/channel_limits.json"
       allow_unlisted_channels: true

   claude_code:
     servers:
       controls: {enabled: true}   # The one MCP server

This tells OSPREY to use the **mock connector**, which accepts any channel
name and returns synthetic data. In production, you change ``type: mock`` to
``type: epics`` and point it at real hardware --- your agent code stays the same.

The ``limits_checking`` section enables the safety limits system. The limits
database defines allowed ranges and read-only channels. With
``allow_unlisted_channels: true``, channels not in the database can still be
read freely.

**.mcp.json** --- MCP Server Discovery

This file is auto-generated by ``osprey build`` from your enabled servers in
``config.yml`` — you don't need to write or edit it by hand. The rendered
content looks roughly like:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "mcpServers": {
       "controls": {
         "command": "python",
         "args": ["-m", "osprey.mcp_server.control_system"],
         "env": { "OSPREY_CONFIG": "config.yml" }
       }
     }
   }

This is how the Osprey agent discovers the control system MCP server. When the
agent starts, it launches this server and gains access to tools like
``channel_read`` and ``channel_write``.

**CLAUDE.md** --- Agent Behavior Instructions

This file contains instructions that the Osprey agent reads on startup. It defines how
the agent should behave, what safety rules to follow, and how to format
responses. Edit this file to customize your agent's personality and behavior.

.. note::

   The ``hello_world`` template also installs agent **hooks** for
   safety enforcement. These hooks run automatically before each tool call to
   check limits and require human approval for writes. You don't need to
   configure them manually.

Step 3: Start the Agent
------------------------

From your project directory:

.. code-block:: bash

   claude

.. note::

   On first run, the Osprey agent will ask you to trust the MCP servers in this
   project. Accept to allow the agent to use the control system tools.

   The Osprey agent connects to the ``control_system`` MCP server and is ready to accept
   queries.

Step 4: Try It Out
-------------------

Try these queries to see the mock control system in action:

**Read a single channel:**

.. code-block:: text

   You: Read channel SR:BEAM:CURRENT

Expected output (the exact wording depends on your ``CLAUDE.md`` and the
agent's output style, but the channel, a value with units, and a status
should all appear):

.. code-block:: text

   Channel: SR:BEAM:CURRENT
   Value:   250.3 mA
   Status:  OK

The mock connector returns synthetic beam current data. It generates
realistic values based on the channel name.

**Ask what's available:**

.. code-block:: text

   You: What channels are available?

The agent explains it can read any channel name --- the mock connector accepts
all PV names without needing a real control system.

**Read multiple channels:**

.. code-block:: text

   You: Read SR:VAC:PRESSURE:01 and SR:MAG:QF:01:CURRENT:RB

The Osprey agent calls the ``channel_read`` tool for each channel and presents the
results together --- vacuum pressure and magnet readback values.

Step 5: Safety & Limits
------------------------

OSPREY enforces safety at two levels: **limits checking** (automatic) and
**human approval** (interactive). This step walks through both.

**1. Enable writes**

Edit ``config.yml`` to allow write operations:

.. code-block:: yaml

   control_system:
     type: mock
     writes_enabled: true   # Changed from false

``config.yml`` is a *build-time* input. Safety-critical fields like
``writes_enabled`` are baked into the agent's generated configuration (the
``.claude/`` artifacts), so editing ``config.yml`` alone does not change the
agent's behavior. Regenerate the artifacts and relaunch:

.. code-block:: bash

   osprey claude regen
   claude

.. note::

   You can check whether your artifacts are in sync at any time with
   ``osprey claude status``. If you forget to regenerate, the agent warns you at
   startup that ``config.yml`` has drifted from its generated configuration.

**2. Write within limits** (succeeds with approval)

.. code-block:: text

   You: Write 150.0 to SR:MAG:QF:01:CURRENT:SP

The value 150.0 is within the allowed range for this channel (0--300 A in the
limits database). The approval hook prompts you before executing:

.. code-block:: text

   ⚠ Write requested: SR:MAG:QF:01:CURRENT:SP = 150.0
   Approve? [y/N]

Type ``y`` to approve. The mock connector accepts the write and confirms.

**3. Write outside limits** (blocked)

.. code-block:: text

   You: Write 500.0 to SR:MAG:QF:01:CURRENT:SP

The value 500.0 exceeds the maximum of 300.0 defined in
``data/channel_limits.json``. The limits hook blocks the write before it
reaches the connector --- no approval prompt appears. The agent surfaces
something like:

.. code-block:: text

   ✗ Write blocked: 500.0 exceeds max=300.0 for SR:MAG:QF:01:CURRENT:SP

**4. Write to a read-only channel** (blocked)

.. code-block:: text

   You: Write 1.0 to SR:BEAM:CURRENT

``SR:BEAM:CURRENT`` is marked as read-only in ``data/channel_limits.json``.
The limits hook blocks the write regardless of the value, and the agent
reports something like:

.. code-block:: text

   ✗ Write blocked: SR:BEAM:CURRENT is read-only

Step 6: Understand the Flow
----------------------------

Here's what happens when you ask "Read channel SR:BEAM:CURRENT":

.. code-block:: text

   You ──→ Osprey agent ──→ channel_read MCP tool
                                    │
                              Mock Connector
                                    │
                           Synthetic data ──→ Osprey agent formats response ──→ You

1. You type a natural language query
2. The Osprey agent decides to call the ``channel_read`` MCP tool
3. The MCP server receives the call and routes it to the **mock connector**
4. The mock connector generates synthetic data (realistic noise, naming-based values)
5. The Osprey agent formats the response and presents it to you

**This is the same flow in production** --- just with ``type: epics`` instead of
``type: mock``. The connector handles the difference; your agent and queries
stay the same.

Step 7: Customize
------------------

**Change agent behavior** by editing ``CLAUDE.md``:

Add a line like "Always report values with 4 decimal places" or "When reading
magnet channels, also explain what the magnet does." Restart the Osprey agent to see
the effect.

**Add new channels to the limits database** by editing
``data/channel_limits.json``:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "SR:MAG:CORR:01:CURRENT:SP": {
       "min_value": -5.0,
       "max_value": 5.0,
       "writable": true
     }
   }

This lets you define safe operating ranges for additional channels. Any write
to a channel listed here is checked against its ``min_value``/``max_value``
range before the approval prompt.

Next Steps
==========

You've built a working agent with one MCP server and a mock control system.
Here's where to go from here:

- **Production deployment**: The :doc:`control-assistant` template adds channel
  finder, electronic logbook search, archiver access, and a web terminal
- **Architecture deep dive**: The :doc:`conceptual-tutorial` explains the
  MCP server architecture, connector system, and safety mechanisms
- **CLI reference**: See :doc:`../cli-reference/index` for all ``osprey`` commands
